Barrister Parvateesam by Mokkapati Narasimha Sastry is one of the finest novels in world literature. It is, how­ever, little known outside South India. Parvateesam, the hero of the novel, is an Indian Innocent abroad. The funny life that Parvateesam leads in England is told with such a kindliness that while reading it we laugh at our own absurdities, at our own incongruities. Apart from this, the novel provides us with an interesting insight into the English society, its culture and traditions of 1920’s.

I
The train was like our trains. The compartments were a little bigger than ours. There were cushions for the third class compartments too.

We reached Paris by day break. I finished brush­ing my teeth and went to the new train. It was overcro­wded. Some compartments were vacant. I went in and sat as they were third class compartments. Within a minute a lady came, saw me and shouted at a peon and asked him to take me down. The peon said “Get down” in English and said many things in French. I said “I don’t get down”. He went and brought the guard. I didn’t get down even when the guard told me to do so. He showed me at the window pane. On it was written “Des Dames”. I didn’t understand what it meant. It was all right. I felt happy. He said “Get down” I said “why?” He could not find an alternative so he brought the station master. He knew little English. He told me (in English) that it was a ladies’ compartment and requested me to get down and showed me another vacant compartment.

We reached Boulon by midday. I got down from the train and got into a steamer. The steamer was very small. There was a lot of disturbance in the sea. So every­body felt nasuea and vomitings. Though I travelled by the steamer for many days, I never suffered so much. Every­body slept in corners. I wondered when I would be reli­eved from this trouble. It didn’t take more than two hours. But that period appeared to be like an age.

It was around 5 O’clock when we got down at Pokestun. I didn’t forget that I arrived in England. So I put my right foot first while getting down. There was some sort of disturbance in my mind. I felt dreadful. I came all the way stubbornly, I thought of the future. I prayed to God thinking that there is God who rules our destiny.

II
Whatever it is, I have told you I landed in England taking all precautions, I landed setting my right foot first. Though I put my right foot first carefully and scientifically. London didn’t appear to have noticed this. I felt it was not welcoming me. I felt like standing with an arati flame that had extinguished. If we are lucky it doesn’t matter which foot we place first.

I don’t say my enthusiasm has died out completely on landing in England but it has certainly cooled down. I can’t analyse the reason. No sooner did I put my foot in London than the mercury level in the barometer appeared to have come down. Slowly I brought down my luggage and stood on the platform. I didn’t know what to do. I didn’t know where to go. It was all confusing. If it was Moghulthurru many parents and my of my friends would have gathered around me as though I had come from a long distance (though I came from the school). My friends would have played with me for a long time. I need not tell about my mother. She would say “Have you come, son? First wash your feet and face. Get up. What! you look so tired”. After washing my feet she would serve me with snacks. Now and then she would ‘disenchant the evil’ (Dishti). I used to feel ashamed and say, “what mother? How orthodox you are! For how many days more you will disenchant this evil? Do you still think I am a kid? Now I recollected all this and felt sad. Wiping my eyes and shivering in the chilly weather I was thinking of taking out my shawl from the bedding. At that moment I found an employee of Cook and Com­pany before me. He appeared to me like a god come down the heavens. He stared at me and with a smile said, “Ha Ha! Ah! Good evening. What is your name? Ah! Let me see. You are the great Mr. Parvateesam, Aren’t you? Fine. We were hearing a lot about you. Good. Fine day Bit chilly what?” I felt very happy at this. He addressed me as “great Parvateesam”. He informed me that he had heard a lot about me. It is very strange. How did he find out that I am great. It was not even half an hour after I got down here. But how could he hear about me? I felt it was very wonderful. I tried tobehave as though I was not in any way inferior to him I said (in English), “Yes, Sir, I Parvateesam. How you know me, Cook?” I wanted to hint to him that I knew English and he should not unnecessarily put on this ludicrous show ignoring my proficiency in English. He said, “Good lad, clever. Aren’t you? Come, hurry” and catching hold of my hand he began to pull me. I thought he was deaf and instantly freeing myself out of his clutches said; “My saman there. I go and get saman and come”, I turned and showed my luggage. He said, “Oh Oh! you and your bloody saman. What do you mean by samans?” I said, “My box, Sir and bed Sir” and showed them. He said, “Oh! that and laughed hilariously and murmared samans, samans, four times. He said, “it doesn’t matter. You will not miss your samans anywhere. I asked some one to bring them. He will certainly bring them. We have to go quickly and get into that train”. The people who got down from the steamer were hurriedly getting into the train.

I said, “We have come to England. Why this train again? Where have we to go?” He said, “This is England but this is the beginning. London is a few miles away from this place. If we travel for three hours, we get there around 8 O’clock. If we take you there, our duty will be over. Later, you have to fend for yourself”. Saying this he walked quickly. He didn’t leave my hand all the time. He spoke all this in English. You might be wonder­ing how he could not speak in Telugu. He didn’t know any Telugu. Even for me born and brought up in Telugu land, it is difficult to pronounce lots of words in Telugu. How can anybody expect a foreigner like this English cook to speak Telugu. You know there are some words that even I can’t pronounce though I am in Telugu land, how can he speak them?

III

He opened the trunk and began to rummage article by article with tips of his fingers. I felt very angry at this. My friend understood that I was about to say some­thing, he pressed my hand strongly not to utter anything. Later my bed was untied. He saw my orange coloured shawl and was stunned. He put his hand on his heart and leaned on the chair closing his eyes. I was very much terrified that he might collapse before us. Within a minute he was alright and said, “what is this?” I said, “My shawl”. He said, “your what?” I said, “My saluva”.

He pitied me and said, “Can’t you speak English my lord?”.

When I was about to answer his question, my friend said, “why? He speaks English well. He was con­tinuously speaking in English in the train on the way. This is the rug used in their country”. The man said, “Oh! that”s it. It is very nice. Enquire from him whet­her he likes to dispose it of”. My friend hinted to him to keep quite. The man said, “it is not like that. If this boy has any idea of disposing it of, I want to make the government purchase it and keep it in the British museum. It is not for me. It will also be profitable to him. Let it be. I am not bothered”. He was about to complete the verifi­cation. But he found a packet containing tooth powder and some palm leaves. He opened it and said, “Is this any eatable? or medicine ? or poison?” My friend began to laugh boisterously. I overcame my grief and said, “Not anything like that. This powder is meant for brushing my teeth and these leaves for cleaning my tongue”. He could not understand what all I said. He left it to my fate and issued me a clearance card and permitted me to go away. As there was no other alternative I folded them up and packed them.

We came out and the luggage was brought behind us. I found lots of people hurriedly walking on all sides. Tramcars, Motor-cars, horse-drawn carriages in thousands were running. At once I wondered why they were going so hurriedly, I was thinking where I should stay as the man from Cook and Company would leave me here. I asked him to leave me in a small hotel. He said. “Don’t go to a hotel. Everything will be strange to you there. There will be none to advise you. There is a government rest house here called ‘India House’. You will find your coun­try men there. I will take you there. Later you can make your own arrangements”. He called a horse-drawn carriage, and asked me to get into it. He told the cart driver to take us to Croywell Road. He shut the door to save himself from the chilly weather. Within a quarter or an hour the cart halted at India House. We got down and went into it. My friend introduced me to a man-perhaps, he was the proprietor. He advised the man to take care of me, shook hands with me and said, “Good-bye and good luck young man I wish you well”, and immediately left the place. I didn’t see when my luggage was brought in. It was put behind me. The proprietor slowly looked at me and said, “Which part in India do you come from?” I stylishly said, “Madras”.

He signaled to me to occupy my seat. I sat. He said “why did you come here?” I felt that it was a sen­seless question. Did he feel that I had come all the way to see his handsome personality. I said, “I have come here for studies”. He asked, “what do you like to study?” I said, “what is there to study-Barrister” as though there was nothing other than that. I was of the opinion that all people came here to study “barrister”. He asked, “Here?” I said, “perhaps in Edinburgh”. He asked, “How many days will you stay here?” I said, “I may be here for one or two days”. He enquired. “Have you taken your meal?” I said, “No”. He said, “Go into the dining hall and have your meal. Meanwhile, I arrange a room for you”.

When I was thinking where the dining hall might be, he understood my feelings and showed me a man who came there just then and said, “He will take you there. If you tell him what you like to eat, he will arra­nge it” and left.

Perhaps that strange man might be a bearer there. He took me in very politely. It was a very big room. It was also wide. A big table was laid from one end to the other. Chairs were arranged around it. Perhaps a batch of people had just finished their meal. Many plates were on the table and in them were remnants of the dinner. Water­glasses, spoons, knives and some other articles were spread on the table. Some young men stood in groups and were talking among themselves. All of them suddenly turned to me and looked at me as if I were a strange animal. They felt as through they were very civilized and I was a rustic. None had come to me. None also spoke to me, I wondered at their strange behaviour. In India, as soon as we come across a stranger, we enquire about his birth place and ask him where he is going to and on what business. It is our tradition to introduce ourselves to a stranger and advise him to have his supper with us when it is getting dark. But what is it here? These be­have as if they are tongue-tied. Not even one speaks to me a few words. Will the pearls in their months fall down if they speak to me? It is below their dignity to speak to a stranger? Did I request them for any help? I don’t know what is it! Everything seems to be peculiar.

The bearer who brought me in removed some arti­cles on the table and requested me to sit on a chair. He said. “What do you want to take?” Meanwhile a man in the group seemed to pity me, came to me, sat beside me and said, “Where do you come from? When did you come?” I said, “I have come from Godavari District of Madras State. I am Telugu speaking”. He heard me and called another man in the group and said, “He has come from your district. Will you enquire what he needs?” He said. “I don’t know him. I never saw him. Nobody has introduced him to me. How can I speak to him?”. The man beside, me laughed and said, “That’s true, Nobody has introduced him to me. Even then I am speaking to him”. The other man left without a word.

The man beside me asked, “what do you take Sir?” Are you a vegetarian or non-vegetarian?” I said, “I am a pure vegetarian”. He said to the bearer who brought me in and standing behind me, “Arrange a vege­tarian meal for him”. He brought and gave me some rice or some curry like thing. Later he gave me some bread, butter and some jam. As I was hungry–hungry people don’t know the taste–I ate it within no time. Later pudd­ing – Sago pudding – a lump like thing, some hot milk and some sugar were brought in. I ate all this and stood up. The bearer said, ‘I will take you to your room’. The new acquaintance said, “I will meet you tomorrow morning. Tell me if you need anything”. He informed me that his name was Menon and said, “Good night” and left me.

The bearer took me into a small room, arranged everything and said, “Good night Sir, Sound sleep” and left that place.

My luggage was already brought into the room. I sat on the cot and when I began to remove my coat, shoes, and socks, I recollected that I had not washed my feet and hands before my meal. I felt that we need not follow this custom in this country. I recollected my mother admo­nishing me and saying to me, “do you take meal in Pariah Clothes?” I removed my pants, wore dhothi and lay down to sleep. When I was thinking of my future, I immediately slept.

As was my habit home, I woke up before 6 O’ clock early in the morning. I moved the window curtain. When I peeped through the window, it was all dark outside. So it was inside this lodging.

When I saw the mansion, the way of constru­ction, chairs, sofas and carpets, I felt amazed. I never saw such things all these years in my life. There were costly curtains for all the doors and windows.

I didn’t know why curtains were hung and what was their use? I couldn’t imagine why curtains were hung without freely permitting air to come in. Would, it not be trouble some to breathe. In France and here too there were glass doors for houses, shops and other constructions. I felt that there was no fear of burglary. There would be no mischievous boys throwing stones on the glass doors for fun. Why is it so dark? Thinking like that, I was on the cot for some more time. “Why it had not yet dawned, has the Sun forgotten to rise. When do they brush their teeth and complete their ablutions. When will they attend to their work? When men and women get up so late who will cook food. When I was thinking thus, it began to dawn. I slept again for another hour and I could not wake up.

After my waking up, I didn’t know where I should go to brush my teeth. When I opened the door, there was no one around. So went in again and began to think what to do. On the wall I found the words “Press-­Button-Servant”. I wanted to know what it was and so pressed the button. Soon a man came and opened the door. His dress and style made me feel that he might be an officer. When I was looking at him surprised he himself came forward and bent low with a smile and said, “Good morning Sir-had sound sleep?” When I was wondering why he dressed up himself in such lurid fashion, he asked, “what can I do for you Sir?”. Then I realised he must be a servant. I also recollected the words written on the wall “Press - Button - Servant”.

I stood stylishly and in their tradition I extended my hand to shake hands with him. He laughed and pre­ssed my hand lightly and left saying, “Thank you, Sir” I said, “I want to go to Lavatory. Where”. He walked before me like a servant before a King and said, “Oh, this way Sir” and led me to a side room. He opened the door and said, “you can wash-here Sir” and showed me a wash basin and water tap. He showed me a big Vat and said, “you can have your bath here Sir – hot or cold” turned the two taps and showed me. Very hot water came out from one tap and cold water from the other. He said, “meet your later Sir” and left me. Every­thing was strange to me. There was no resemblance between this country and ours in any aspect. It would dis­appoint you if I go on narrating how much time I spent to finish my ablutions and how long I stayed in the room. I can’t tell you. But I must tell you about one thing. This will be a testing time except for those who can guess at and adjust themselves to new situations. Others will be in trouble.

I want to tell you about one more thing here. I thought of going into my room bring my towel. When I found laundry washed towels and soap in the bath room, I doubted whether they were kept there me or not. I wondered whether the management of the hotel supplied those articles for all inmates or I was specially treated by them. I could not leave the towels on seeing their Jas­mine like whiteness. I thought I could clear my doubt later. When I entered the room, they supplied me with beds, pillows and rugs. So I recollected that there was no need of spreading my bed.

IV

I felt delighted on seeing them. I stood staring at them for a minute when they were playing. Without my knowledge, there was a glee in my face. Some children went away on seeing me. One or two children came to me courageously, with wide open eyes and stood looking at me in wonder and in some fear.

One or two children who were behind me went running to their mothers, embraced them and said, “Mummy, Mummy, there is a black man mummy”. Ano­ther child said, “will the black kidnap the children? Another said, “Mummy, will he never take his bath?” Their mothers pressed their mouths and said, “It is wrong. You must not say like that. If you ever say like that, you will be beaten. Be careful” and threatened them. I felt happy at the courage of the boys who came to me and tried to say, “Hello”.

They were terrified and ran away from that place. I left the place laughing. There was no need for me to walk a long distance. As the bearer at the station said, I saw in a street “rooms– to let” boards. I went to such a house, pressed the button and stood waiting. An old woman opened the door, looked into my face and said “Ohh!” with contempt. She suddenly closed the door and went in. I went laughing to another house. There was a middle aged women. She opened the door, stared at me and said, “What do you want?”. I said, “I need a room”.She politely lied “No vacant rooms. very sorry” and went away. When I went to another house, the land lady of the house expressed her feelings that she didn’t like to let her house for people like me and quoted a high rate. I understood her feelings and came out.

At another house an old lady opened the door and said, “what is your nationality? Do you come from Africa?”. I said “No. India”. She said, “Oh! India. I feel happy. Are you a prince there? I laughed and said “No. I am not a prince but an ordinary man. I have come here for studies. I want a room”.

She laughed, expressed her inability and said, Now there is no vacancy. A room will be vacated within a week. If you come then, I will give you a room”, I felt very happy at this. When I was going ahead, one of our country men was coming opposite to me I felt very happy. I thought he had saved me. I stopped him and said “Good morning”, explained him of my trouble and asked him what I should do. He said “Follow me” and took me into a big house where the board “Indian Asso­ciation” was hung. He made me sit in a chair and he sat before me and said, Tell me about you” in English.

I found many of our country men coming in and going out from that place. I narrated completely everything about me. He heard me leisurely. He said, “I am a Bengalee”. When he was about to tell something more a man, who was clearly like a Telugu man, came in. The Bengali man who was opposite to me said “Hello Raju, come here”. He came and stood. The Bengali man said, “sit down” and introduced me to him saying that I am Telugu man and come from his area. “He is searching for a room. Show him a room and leave him in the room. Otherwise he will be put to troubles. If we can’t help one another how can we survive here. What do you say?” and laughed.

Raju said, “Oh certainly. I will do as you said. You can go”. The Bengalee gentleman stood up andsaid, “we will meet again boy. This Raju belongs to your area. He is a good man. He will help you in what you need. I have some work. I am going” shook hands with me and left the place. Raju came and sat in the chair vaca­ted by him and said, “What boy?, Which is your birth place? Where do you come from? When did you come? Tell me about you”. He told me that he was from Bhima­varam and so a Telugu man and a Kshatriya. He once again asked me to tell him about me. I narrated briefly what had happened to me until then. He said, “where is your luggage?” I said, “I kept it in the station”. He said, “Get up. Let us go. We will bring your luggage to my room. Until you secure a room, you can stay with me. You don’t have any trouble. Everything will be comforta­ble”. I went to the station, took my luggage and paid some amount to the bearers and reached Raju’s room.

I comfortably took rest for some time there. Even without my request, the land lady arranged me some tea and bread etc., on the table. I ate it. When I was looking at the books and sat for a while Raju returned home from the college. He said, “Have you taken rest leisurely? Have you taken tea? I said, “Ah! I have taken every­thing. I felt very comfortable here”. Raju laid the books there, went into the bath room. By the time he came after washing his face, the land lady brought us tea and snacks. I said, “I don’t want anything”. Raju said, “If anybody offers us tea, we should not refuse to take it. When a guest comes into our threshold in our country, the inmate of the house offers water for washing our feet, cold water for fulfilling our thirst. Similarly, in this coun­try whenever a guest comes though the inmates may be happy or sorrowful offer us tea. We shall not say ‘No’. This was the first lesson taught to me by Raju.

After taking tea Raju said, “tell me everything about you”, He said, “Which is your birth place”. I said, “Moghulthurru”. He said, “What! Moghulthurru”. Then you are a man nearer to us. There are many of my rela­tives in that village. We were from Podouru in the Past”. When I clearly told him about me, he leisurely heard it. I said, “show me some room and admit me in a college”. He said, “Yes, I will certainly help you. Is this is a big help? If we don’t help one another in a foreign country, who will help us? we will go to the park for this sessi­on and speak to each other. We will see the room tomo­rrow morning”. Both of us started and went to a nearby park and sat. It was around 6 O’ clock. It was very dark. Even then it was overcrowded with many men and wo­men. The children who were playing there until then were running home. Many young men and women sat in pairs. Some sat on the benches and some others on the grass. Some lay down and were laughing at me. They were speaking to each other. Now and then they forgot this world and were hugging and kissing each other without time to breathe in. It appeared that every pair felt that they were lonely in the park and enjoyed themselves. So we sat on the grass comfortably.

Raju said, “Babul what is your name”. I said, “I am called Parvatheesam. Our surname is Vemuri”, He said, “That’s well. I have to tell you briefly about the traditions and customs here. If you know the procedure and act accordingly, we won’t have troubles. The first thing is if anybody asks you your name, it is sufficient if you say ‘Parva­theesam’. You needn’t add your surname”.

“I have to tell the procedure to hire out rooms here. The people who let out their rooms are called lower middle class. They are poorer than our middle class people. Generally widows, aged spinsters, couple whose income is low let out a big portion or one or two rooms which are not useful for them. The room will be provided with chairs, sofas etc. Three are four chairs, one sofa, one table, one cot, a bed, pillows, a rug to spread, rugs to cover our body, towels to wipe the body will be given. The room rent includes the rent of these articles also. Not only towels but also pieces of soaps will be provided to us. Later in every room - you might    have seen in      my room - there will be a fire place. They make a hearth in the wall, arrange coal and lit it. There will be a chimney which will take away smoke and which doesn’t permit the smoke into the house. It will be always burning like funeral of Ravana­shura for seven to eight months in a year. They will arrange chairs near the oven in winter and sit there. The whole room will be warm. You might have found it by now”.

“There is a top secret. The people of this country particularly the low class don’t brush their teeth” He said: I was very much stunned and said, “Do they wash that’ He said, “No body washes that” I said, “Then what?” He said, “In the lavatory there will be a paper roller. People take out a paper from the roller, wipe with it and throw in a China commode where we leave our secretion, if you pull the Chain there, much water flows into it and cleans the secretion and takes it down. As this is a cold country, foul smell will not come out. Needless to say that people who don’t brush their teeth don’t take their bath”. I said “Then what about us?” He said, “If you like you too can stop”. I said, “What is this? You say like that, I am a brahmin and Vaidik too, I feel sorry for not saying my prayers, how can I stop taking my bath - If so I don’t stay here for a minute. Whatever you may say, I consi­der that I have come to see this country and go away straight. I can’t stay here where people are uncultured and uncivilized”. “It is left to your choice”, I said. “Yes” “That’s right. There is no need of your whims and fan­cies. I haven’t advised you to stop. If you want hot water for your bath, if you tell the people of the house, they will supply you with water. Don’t bother”.

I said, “Then it is in a way good for me to bring powder of cow dung cake & palm leaves”.

He was stunned and said, “What’? Have you brought powder of cow dung cake and palm leaves. I said, “Yes. How could I spend all these days without them?” A word between us, I said, “Have you not brought anything? Are you following traditions of our coun­try exactly?” He said, “Had you not sought anybody’s advice when you were coming?”

I said, “Don’t you know there was none who could advise me?”

He slowly looked at me and said, “that’s right. That is true. Such people are not there not only in your village but also in the neighbourhood. Let it be. You did a good thing. As they will not be spoiled, keep them carefully. You can use them on your return journey. At the time of going to our room we will purchase tooth cleaning material used here”.

“We needn’t go to any hotel for meal. If you tell the items wanted by you to the land lady, she will pre­pare’ and give them to you. They will charge some money for the meal. How much they may take, it will be cheaper than in a hotel. You are a brahmin and Vaidika too. You will not touch mutton, fish etc., which I eat. If you tell them that you are a vegetarian, they will bring you rice, salt etc. If you know how to cook the food, tell them. Otherwise, you have to eat according to their preparation. After ten days you will be accustomed to all this”. I said. “Oh! it is not necessary. I am habituated to all these. When my mother had her menses and if my father went to fields or to other village I used to cook food. My mother praised me that I cooked so well. After my settling down, once I will make you taste food prepared by me”. He said, “Very happy. It will be like going to my home and eating food there” and laughed.

Slowly we got up and reached the room. They gave him his routine food and I was given some rice, potato, curry and milk. Potato curry is nothing but mashed potatoes. My friend advised me to spread salt and wet chilly powder on it. I said. “I have already learnt it.”
